README.md, before:

[![Iry](https://github.com/Fire-Dragon-DoL/iry/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Fire-Dragon-DoL/iry/actions/workflows/main.yml) [![Gem Version](https://badge.fury.io/rb/iry.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/rb/iry)

# Iry

Convert constraint errors into Rails model validation errors.

## Documentation

https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry

## Usage

Given the following database schema:

```sql
create extension if not exists "pgcrypto";

create table if not exists users (
    id uuid primary key default gen_random_uuid(),
    unique_text text unique not null default gen_random_uuid()::text
    created_at timestamp(6) not null,
    updated_at timestamp(6) not null
);
```

Set the following constraint on the `User` class:

```ruby
class User < ActiveRecord::Base
  include Iry

  belongs_to :user, optional: true

  unique_constraint :unique_text
end
```

Now one of the saving mechanisms can be used:
- [`handle_constraints`](#handle_constraints)
- [`save`](#save)
- [`save!`](#save!)

When saving a new `User` record or updating it, in case constraint exceptions are raised, these will be rescued and
validation errors will be applied to the record, like in the following example:

```ruby
user = User.create!(unique_text: "some unique text")
fail_user = User.new(unique_text: "some unique text")

success = Iry.save(fail_user)

success #=> false
fail_user.errors.details.fetch(:unique_text) #=> [{error: :taken}]
```

Multiple constraints of the same or different types can be present on the model, as long as the `:name` is different.

The following constraint types are available:

- [`check_constraint`](#check_constraint)
- [`exclusion_constraint`](#exclusion_constraint)
- [`foreign_key_constraint`](#foreign_key_constraint)
- [`unique_constraint`](#unique_constraint)

The class method `.constraints` is also available, that returns all the constraints applied to a model.

## Constraints

### [`check_constraint`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry%2FMacros:check_constraint)

```ruby
check_constraint(key, name: nil, message: :invalid) ⇒ void
```

Catches a specific check constraint violation.

- **key** (`Symbol`) which key will have validation errors added to
- **name** (optional `String`) constraint name in the database, to detect constraint errors. Infferred if omitted
- **message** (optional `String` or `Symbol`) error message, defaults to `:invalid`

### [`exclusion_constraint`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry%2FMacros:exclusion_constraint)

```ruby
exclusion_constraint(key, name: nil, message: :taken) ⇒ void
```

Catches a specific exclusion constraint violation.

- **key** (`Symbol`) which key will have validation errors added to
- **name** (optional `String`) constraint name in the database, to detect constraint errors. Infferred if omitted
- **message** (optional `String` or `Symbol`) error message, defaults to `:taken`

### [`foreign_key_constraint`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry%2FMacros:foreign_key_constraint)

```ruby
foreign_key_constraint(key_or_keys, name: nil, message: :required, error_key: nil) ⇒ void
```

Catches a specific foreign key constraint violation.

- **key_or_keys** (`Symbol` or array of `Symbol`) key or keys used to make the foreign key constraint
- **name** (optional `String`) constraint name in the database, to detect constraint errors. Infferred if omitted
- **message** (optional `String` or `Symbol`) error message, defaults to `:required`
- **error_key** (optional `Symbol`) which key will have validation errors added to

### [`unique_constraint`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry%2FMacros:unique_constraint)

```ruby
unique_constraint(key_or_keys, name: nil, message: :taken, error_key: nil) ⇒ void
```

Catches a specific foreign key constraint violation.

- **key_or_keys** (`Symbol` or array of `Symbol`) key or keys used to make the unique constraint
- **name** (optional `String`) constraint name in the database, to detect constraint errors. Infferred if omitted
- **message** (optional `String` or `Symbol`) error message, defaults to `:taken`
- **error_key** (optional `Symbol`) which key will have validation errors added to

## Advanced Usage

### [`handle_constraints!`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry.handle_constraints)

```ruby
.handle_constraints(model) { ... } ⇒ nil, Handlers::Model
```

Serving as base for `save` and `save!`, it will detects constraint violations, halt the execution of the block, convert
violations to validation errors and return `nil` when violations are detected, otherwise the model object provided as
argument.

### [`save`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry.save)

Acts the same as `ActiveRecord::Base#save`, accepting the same arguments and returning the same values.
In addition, it will return `false` if a constraint violation of the tracked constraints is detected and validation
errors will be added to `errors`.

### [`save!`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry.save!)

Acts the same as `ActiveRecord::Base#save!`, accepting the same arguments and returning the same values.
In addition, it will raise `Iry::ConstraintViolation` when constraint violations are detected.

## Limitations

- `valid?` will not check for constraints. If calling `valid?` right after a `save` operation, keep in mind `errors`
    are cleared
- It is recommended to avoid transactions when using `Iry`, because if a violation is detected, anything after
    `Iry.save/save!/handle_constraints` will result in `ActiveRecord::StatementInvalid`, since the transaction is
    aborted
- Currently only PostgreSQL is supported with the `pg` gem, but it should be simple to add support for other databases.

## Installation

Install the gem and add to the application's Gemfile by executing:

    $ bundle add iry

If bundler is not being used to manage dependencies, install the gem by executing:

    $ gem install iry

## Development

**Requirements:**
- PostgreSQL with `psql`, `createdb`, `dropdb`
- NodeJS 18 with `npm`

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and the created tag, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/Fire-Dragon-DoL/iry.

Commit message:

feat: destroy with constraint check is present

README.md, after:

[![Iry](https://github.com/Fire-Dragon-DoL/iry/actions/workflows/main.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/Fire-Dragon-DoL/iry/actions/workflows/main.yml) [![Gem Version](https://badge.fury.io/rb/iry.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/rb/iry)

# Iry

Convert constraint errors into Rails model validation errors.

## Documentation

https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry

## Usage

Given the following database schema:

```sql
create extension if not exists "pgcrypto";

create table if not exists users (
    id uuid primary key default gen_random_uuid(),
    unique_text text unique not null default gen_random_uuid()::text
    created_at timestamp(6) not null,
    updated_at timestamp(6) not null
);
```

Set the following constraint on the `User` class:

```ruby
class User < ActiveRecord::Base
  include Iry

  belongs_to :user, optional: true

  unique_constraint :unique_text
end
```

Now one of the saving mechanisms can be used:
- [`handle_constraints`](#handle_constraints)
- [`save`](#save)
- [`save!`](#save!)
- [`destroy`](#destroy)

When saving a new `User` record or updating it, in case constraint exceptions are raised, these will be rescued and
validation errors will be applied to the record, like in the following example:

```ruby
user = User.create!(unique_text: "some unique text")
fail_user = User.new(unique_text: "some unique text")

success = Iry.save(fail_user)

success #=> false
fail_user.errors.details.fetch(:unique_text) #=> [{error: :taken}]
```

Multiple constraints of the same or different types can be present on the model, as long as the `:name` is different.

The following constraint types are available:

- [`check_constraint`](#check_constraint)
- [`exclusion_constraint`](#exclusion_constraint)
- [`foreign_key_constraint`](#foreign_key_constraint)
- [`unique_constraint`](#unique_constraint)

The class method `.constraints` is also available, that returns all the constraints applied to a model.

## Constraints

### [`check_constraint`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry%2FMacros:check_constraint)

```ruby
check_constraint(key, name: nil, message: :invalid) ⇒ void
```

Catches a specific check constraint violation.

- **key** (`Symbol`) which key will have validation errors added to
- **name** (optional `String`) constraint name in the database, to detect constraint errors. Infferred if omitted
- **message** (optional `String` or `Symbol`) error message, defaults to `:invalid`

### [`exclusion_constraint`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry%2FMacros:exclusion_constraint)

```ruby
exclusion_constraint(key, name: nil, message: :taken) ⇒ void
```

Catches a specific exclusion constraint violation.

- **key** (`Symbol`) which key will have validation errors added to
- **name** (optional `String`) constraint name in the database, to detect constraint errors. Infferred if omitted
- **message** (optional `String` or `Symbol`) error message, defaults to `:taken`

### [`foreign_key_constraint`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry%2FMacros:foreign_key_constraint)

```ruby
foreign_key_constraint(key_or_keys, name: nil, message: :required, error_key: nil) ⇒ void
```

Catches a specific foreign key constraint violation.

- **key_or_keys** (`Symbol` or array of `Symbol`) key or keys used to make the foreign key constraint
- **name** (optional `String`) constraint name in the database, to detect constraint errors. Infferred if omitted
- **message** (optional `String` or `Symbol`) error message, defaults to `:required`
- **error_key** (optional `Symbol`) which key will have validation errors added to

### [`unique_constraint`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry%2FMacros:unique_constraint)

```ruby
unique_constraint(key_or_keys, name: nil, message: :taken, error_key: nil) ⇒ void
```

Catches a specific foreign key constraint violation.

- **key_or_keys** (`Symbol` or array of `Symbol`) key or keys used to make the unique constraint
- **name** (optional `String`) constraint name in the database, to detect constraint errors. Infferred if omitted
- **message** (optional `String` or `Symbol`) error message, defaults to `:taken`
- **error_key** (optional `Symbol`) which key will have validation errors added to

## Advanced Usage

### [`handle_constraints!`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry.handle_constraints)

```ruby
.handle_constraints(model) { ... } ⇒ nil, Handlers::Model
```

Serving as base for `save` and `save!`, it will detects constraint violations, halt the execution of the block, convert
violations to validation errors and return `nil` when violations are detected, otherwise the model object provided as
argument.

### [`save`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry.save)

Acts the same as `ActiveRecord::Base#save`, accepting the same arguments and returning the same values.
In addition, it will return `false` if a constraint violation of the tracked constraints is detected and validation
errors will be added to `errors`.

### [`save!`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry.save!)

Acts the same as `ActiveRecord::Base#save!`, accepting the same arguments and returning the same values.
In addition, it will raise `Iry::ConstraintViolation` when constraint violations are detected.

### [`destroy`](https://rubydoc.info/gems/iry/Iry.destroy)

Acts the same as `ActiveRecord::Base#destroy`.
In addition, it will return `false` if a constraint violation of the tracked constraints is detected and validation
errors will be added to `errors`.

## Limitations

- `valid?` will not check for constraints. If calling `valid?` right after a `save` operation, keep in mind `errors`
    are cleared
- It is recommended to avoid transactions when using `Iry`, because if a violation is detected, anything after
    `Iry.save/save!/handle_constraints` will result in `ActiveRecord::StatementInvalid`, since the transaction is
    aborted
- Currently only PostgreSQL is supported with the `pg` gem, but it should be simple to add support for other databases.

## Installation

Install the gem and add to the application's Gemfile by executing:

    $ bundle add iry

If bundler is not being used to manage dependencies, install the gem by executing:

    $ gem install iry

## Development

**Requirements:**
- PostgreSQL with `psql`, `createdb`, `dropdb`
- NodeJS 18 with `npm`

After checking out the repo, run `bin/setup` to install dependencies. You can also run `bin/console` for an interactive prompt that will allow you to experiment.

To install this gem onto your local machine, run `bundle exec rake install`. To release a new version, update the version number in `version.rb`, and then run `bundle exec rake release`, which will create a git tag for the version, push git commits and the created tag, and push the `.gem` file to [rubygems.org](https://rubygems.org).

## Contributing

Bug reports and pull requests are welcome on GitHub at https://github.com/Fire-Dragon-DoL/iry.
